Identification and quantification of genes from RNAseq data relies on the assembly of transcribed regions into connected groups of consistent expression levels. Most available tools for transcriptomic analysis are guided by genome annotation and are inherently biased toward detecting annotated regions. However, substantial evidence suggests expression of unannotated genomic regions under specific conditions. These non-canonical transcripts been implicated with development and disease. 
Here we present the tool Rainbow-Wavelet for detecting novel transcribed regions based on read density distributions of RNAseq reads mapped to a reference genome without annotation. Our algorithm finds adjacent regions exhibiting significant changes in average read density of sliding windows. Guided by the assumption that abrupt changes indicate boundaries Rainbow-Wavelet finds coherent transcribed regions and provides insights into expression differences of splicing and alternative transcription start sites. 
We show that Rainbow-Wavelet successfully identifies expressed regions across divergent species when applied to varying genome sizes and structures. Furthermore, we benchmarked Rainbow-Wavelet against the widely used tool Cufflinks. We show that Rainbow-Wavelet detects all genes found by Cufflinks, and further identifies numerous previously unannotated regions. In the future Rainbow-Wavelet will aid the annotation of novel organisms and help elucidate the function of non-canonical transcripts in development and disease. 
